Previously, on The Exorcist...
We believe an exorcism should be
granted.
This girl needs psychiatric
attention.
Your excommunication-- you're
to relinquish your collar,
your right to serve mass,
to take communion.
MARCUS: The string of murders
on the south side of the city.
Nine victims, Bennett.
Heart, eyes, genitals,
hands and feet
are materials needed to perform
vicari pulvari.
Has the church been compromised?
I don't know.
BENNETT: You have some friends
in this town.
They can help you.
Father Marcus,
the one we feared,
until you lost that little boy.
Who's Jessica?
What else don't I know about?
'Cause the demon will.
MARCUS:
Break it off with her, Thomas.
How's Jim?
It's not fine, you know this.
I-I can't then.
For Saint Anthony's,
and your not-depleted parish.
You want it rough,
all you got to do ask.
Oh!
(screams)
HENRY (distant):
Casey!
*
ANGELA:
Casey?
(sing-songy):
Casey!
* Well, come along boys
and listen to my tale *
* I'll tell you all my troubles
on the old Chisholm Trail *
* Come a Ki-yi-yippee-yay,
yippee-yay *
Mom?
You gave me a start, sweetheart.
You certainly took your time
getting up this morning,
didn't you?
You know what they say,
the last one up is a rotten egg.
You're cooking?
Don't act so surprised.
Your favorite omelet.
(quietly gasps)
Ooh, that's lucky.
Why don't you go join your
Father and sister at the table?
This will be ready in a jiff.
Dad, what are you doing?
Just my job, Button.
Don't be jealous, Case.
HENRY:
It's true, Button.
Every girl can't be a swan.
ANGELA:
Okay.
Dig in, Buttercup.
(gasps)
You're being ungracious, dear.
Not to mention rude
to your family.
(mouthing)
Picky eaters, they grow
up to be depressives
and sexual anorexics,
you know.
Try it. You'll like it.
Why resist, darling?
This isn't like you said
it'd be.
Something's not right here.
(grunting)
(panting)
See what you made me do?
Do you think I want to hurt you?
(grunts)
(panting)
(whimpers)
You force me to do this
when you resist.
Now,
I know it's difficult,
but you really must give in
completely.
So say yes.
One tiny
little word.
Yes...
No, no! No! No!
Casey.
No! No!
(crying)
No.
Casey.
*
72 hours?
That is the length
of the hold, yes.
Are you saying there's nothing
we can do about that?
(sighs) This incident
on the train,
um, the police have
the authority to
involuntarily confine
someone like your daughter,
who may be a danger
to herself or others.
No, you don't
understand.
E.R. cleaned her up.
We'll evaluate her.
We're gonna do everything
we can for your daughter.
When can we see her?
Right. Um, there's
no visitors allowed on a 5150.
But you are welcome to stay here
if you want, long as you like.
She's in great hands.
I mean, maybe this
is a good thing.
They're gonna do tests
and figure out
what's wrong with her.
I'm gonna get
everyone coffee.
Henry, this hospital...
It was the closest one
to the train.
It's gonna be fine.
(line ringing)
(knocking)
May I help you?
Good morning, Sister.
I was hoping that I might speak
with the abbess.
The abbess has taken
a vow of silence.
Oh, of course.
Uh, what time
is her hour of respite?
She does take one, doesn't she?
Otherwise, I mean,
she'd go a bit (hums)
Mother Bernadette
is very busy.
She rarely accepts visitors.
Bennett sent me.
My name's
Marcus Keane.
The garden.
Around the side.
(indistinct chatter)
Excuse me for one sec.
Henry, I came
as soon as I heard.
Are you okay?
Me?
I don't know. But Casey--
I've never seen anything
like it.
Father, did the bishop
approve the exorcism?
They were not convinced.
They said no?
I've been forbidden from...
taking further action other
than prayer and advisement.
So what you're saying is
you're useless to us.
HENRY: Ange.
I'm doing
everything I can.
What about your
friend, Marcus?
If you can't help us.
maybe he can.
Marcus is gone, excommunicated.
So, yes, unfortunately,
I'm all you got.
Father, these doctors
are telling me
that I can't do anything
for her.
I can't even see her
for the next...
60-something hours.
And the longer
she's in there,
this thing festers.
Please, doctors and tests
are not what she needs.
This isn't
fair, Father.
I will find a way.
There is someone
I can talk to.
Have faith in me.
* Like the moon
* Mmm
* Shining its face...
* Seems so near...
* Yet so far away...
* But that's the way love is
* That's the way love is *
* Day after day
* Day after day *
* It's so near...
* But yet so far away...
* So far away.
ANGELA:
How is she?
DOCTOR: Uh, well,
we've made some progress.
There's
no intracranial bleeding
or temporal lobe epilepsy.
So, progress
in terms
of ruling things out.
Find anything you'd rule in?
It's a process, Mrs. Rance.
She's severely dehydrated,
and...
there is the genital trauma.
(whimpering)
Genital trauma?
We found
burns.
I don't understand.
Who are you?
Dr. Rho,
psychiatric attending.
We're concerned the trauma
might be self-inflicted.
Is there history of
mental illness in the family?
Schizophrenia...
No mental illness.
What I don't understand
is this law
that allows you to stumble
around looking for explanations,
when, clearly,
she's not getting better.
I understand your frustration.
We're frustrated, too.
But there are
some more tests we can run.
And in the meantime,
we're giving her fluids
and we're keeping her
as comfortable as...
Just hang in there.
(nuns singing)
Watch.
(singing continues)
(man snarling)
(snarling continues)
(singing stops)
(snarling)
Holy Mary.
ALL:
Holy Mother of God.
Mother of the Church.
NUN:
Mother of Divine Grace.
ALL:
Mother most pure.
NUN:
Mother most chaste.
ALL:
Mother inviolate.
(growls)
(shouts)
NUN:
Mother undefiled.
ALL: Mother most amiable.
NUN:
Mother most admirable.
ALL:
Mother of good counsel.
Mother of our Creator.
ALL:
Mother of our Savior.
(low growling)
NUNS:
O vriziol maiz, offeret hoc
liuionz limix.
Brazchia inferorum...
(roaring)
(groans)
reverta ad tronziol...
(low growling)
Ninxia nigrum,
liberati a conchsis.
Son of the morning,
banished from grace.
(low growling)
Profane thing,
ashes on the earth.
(groaning)
You are relieved, outcast.
Fallen angel, you are loved.
(low groaning)
Restrain him before
he rises again.
We must go.
Come with me.
(snoring)
Oh.
Is the abbess ready
to receive me?
The abbess is resting.
So was I.
The sisters have
work to do in the garden...
and your presence is...
undesired.
There's a... a young woman
whose life might depend
on my speaking with her.
There are many who depend
on Mother Bernadette's aid.
She'll speak to you
when she's ready.
Does she know
Bennett sent me?
I don't suppose
I could use your...
Nuns. Bog.
(sniffles)
"Rego."
(rhythmic beeping)
Miss Faye knows you're sad,
but God don't
put us through nothing
that we cannot bear,
pretty thing.
You got to get stronger if
you want to get out of here.
Isn't she sweet?
She called you "pretty."
Take a deep
breath for me.
You won't feel a thing.
(hissing)
(groans softly)
No one in their right mind
would call you "pretty" now.
If I had a mirror, you'd see
what resistance is doing
to your lilac face,
your snow white body.
(hissing)
That's strange.
Can't find a vein.
(pained groan)
It'll be in
in a minute.
Just one more try.
You're doing this to me.
I was making you perfect.
You tricked me.
Oh, I'm sorry.
This never happens.
(groaning)
Now, don't you
tire yourself out talking,
angel.
You save your strength.
When you stop fighting it,
the pain goes away...
(hissing)
...and you and I can dance
a dark floor,
tip tap, tippity
tap. Tip. Tap.
I don't believe you.
Shh.
Shh. Shh.
It's all over now, pumpkin.
You'll feel better
soon, I promise.
(humming)
I couldn't agree more.
(gasps)
(hissing)
(groaning)
(whimpers)
(tinny, old-fashioned
piano music plays)
WOMAN:
"I was born
"with the devil in me.
"I could not help the fact
that I was a murderer,
"no more than the
poet can help
the inspiration to sing."
(female scream on tape)
WOMAN:
The depraved individual
who wrote those
bone-chilling words
was none other than Chicago's
most notorious serial killer,
H.H. Holmes, AKA,
"The Devil in the White City."
I read that book.
WOMAN:
You did?
Good for you.
Don't interrupt.
Chicago has always
attracted the sinful,
the savage, the sadistic.
Nurse-killer, Richard Speck.
(scream)
Killer clown
John Wayne Gacy.
(scream)
But none of them
could compare in sheer
wickedness
to Dr. Henry H. Holmes.
(scream)
No, Lester. We cut that one.
No. I don't think
we did.
We did.
Unbelievable.
Where was I?
Um, Holmes would
butcher and dissect
the corpses of
those he killed...
There were
ritual dismemberments?
Excuse me, sir.
I'm sorry. I said no...
Did they include the heart,
the liver,
or the genitals?
LESTER:
We'll let you know
when it's time to ask
the questions, chief.
Go on.
HENRY:
Hey, there you are.
Oh. Hey.
Oh, sorry. I should have
told you where I was going.
That's all right.
I don't need supervision
at all times.
I... I didn't mean that.
I'm kidding.
I told Kat to go home,
take a shower, change clothes.
Maybe we should, too.
Hmm.
36 more hours.
Remember the time
we took the girls to Maine?
Yeah, uh... Algonquin?
Ogunquit.
Uh, Ogunquit.
(laughs)
I've never told you this,
but on the drive home,
you were taking a nap.
I pulled off
at this rest stop.
Kat wanted something
out of the...
You put the coins in?
Vending machine.
Yeah.
I turn around,
Casey's not there.
So I look for her.
She's not in the bathroom,
she's not in the car.
Then I see her
standing by the side
of the freeway...
cars just flying past.
Oh.
(imitates whooshing)
(whispers):
Oh, God.
She's picking flowers.
That's the most scared
I've ever been.
Until last night.
What she did on the train--
that wasn't Casey.
Huh.
So when she gets out of here,
whatever you think is the best
thing to do-- with Father Tomas,
or Marcus or-- I'm on board.
Mm.
But for now,
we should go home.
(speaking Spanish)
Thank you.
And who is this?
(speaking Spanish)
Uh, he is my little
nephew, Luis.
Uh, sometimes
he's a little bit shy.
Aren't you a sturdy young man?
(phone dings)
(phone buzzes)
I'll tell you what, Luis.
Why don't you follow Karen
to the kitchen,
and she'll have Philippe make
you whatever treat you like.
Within reason.
Within reason, of course.
Thank you.
(whispers)
I am really sorry.
My sister-- she works
a lot of jobs, temps.
She never knows her
schedule in advance.
It sounds difficult.
Well, being a single mom is,
but I'm sure you can imagine.
I can't, actually.
George wasn't interested in
having children when we married.
But even if he wanted to,
I suppose I was a bit
"past my prime," would be
the delicate way to put it.
But you didn't come here
to listen to me rattle on.
What did you want
to discuss?
Yes. Uh,
there is a girl in my parish,
and I would like to
perform a service for her,
but Bishop
Egan-- he's...
tied my hands,
so...
So?
I thought maybe if I
could bring my case
to the cardinal, maybe...
You want to go
above Egan's head?
Devious, Father.
I mean it as a compliment.
Ah.
(rhythmic beeping and whooshing)
(moaning)
(moaning continues)
This service
you want to perform--
is it the right thing to do?
I believe it is the right thing.
It may be the only thing.
WOMAN:
Follow your impulses,
and keep it quiet.
(beeping and whooshing)
Nobody has more respect
for the church than me.
(rattled breathing)
But we can both admit,
they're hardly infallible.
(moaning)
(groaning)
(beeping)
Uncle Tomas.
(speaking Spanish)
There's a scary
man in there.
(Tomas speaks Spanish)
Um... we've taken enough
of your time.
I appreciate the advice.
Uh... thank you.
Anytime.
I noticed you hadn't cashed
my check yet, Father.
Yes. Uh, first thing
in the morning.
Thank you.
(speaking Spanish)
I don't like it here.
*
Tara?
Can you deposit
this check first thing
tomorrow morning, please?
Uh, when, since when do
we get six-figure checks?
It's a big one, I know.
You sure we're not laundering
money for the Mob here?
90% sure.
(sighs)
(knocking)
Yes?
(door opens)
Jessica.
(indistinct chatter)
(sighs heavily)
Let me know when
you have her intubated.
What's going on?
Well, unfortunately, she's not
retaining fluids or eating.
So I am having the nurses
put in a feeding tube.
No. No.
I'm sorry... I'm sorry,
Mrs. Rance,
but under the hold,
I don't require your permission.
She is ours for one more day,
and the decision is mine.
(crying)
(Casey continues crying)
It's not like
I was even looking for it.
He accidently sends me
a text meant for her,
with emojis, like
a 13-year-old.
I play along.
He doesn't figure out it's
me for, like, ten minutes.
I come home. I confront him.
He tries to pretend he doesn't
know what I'm talking about.
I show him my phone,
then he gives up.
And you and me?
Tortured for writing letters,
and all that time, Jim's...
No, no, this...
this wasn't your fault.
Are you sure about that?
I need to be at work
early morning.
I should, um...
I don't know, get a hotel.
God, the thought
of going back there.
No, no,
please stay.
I-I...
you-you can take the bed.
What about you?
(exhales)
I can take the couch.
Uh... probably you think
I am being a gentleman.
I am being a nice person.
But actually
that bed is...
(whispers):
horrible.
(Dixieland jazz playing)
(train whistle blowing)
*
MARCUS:
Is that yours?
That's where
I met Lester.
I was Anthropology.
He was at the Div School.
Eyeballed him in this seminar
on the occult I was auditing.
CO2 plus H2.
Boom. Maybe don't bring up
academia around him.
He never finished his doctorate.
Inaccurate.
I finished.
Those snippety bastards
screwed me out of it.
How do you know Bennett?
He excommunicated me.
(chuckles)
Must have been
on to something big.
That's when they
come for you.
So, what'd you
do to Bennett?
Don't pry.
I'm not prying.
I want to know.
That is the definition
of prying.
I pulled a gun on him...
amongst other things.
A priest with a gun.
An exorcist with a gun...
to be accurate, Cherry.
An exorcist.
You're an exorcist.
So you must have noticed
the surge, then.
If you look,
you see it over and over,
these surges of,
I don't know, whatever
you want to call it,
uh, brutality, carnage.
Demonic activity.
Preceding some truly
cataclysmic event.
Think of England before
the great London fire
in 1666.
666.
Stop right there with your...
numerological "Number of
the Beast" conspiracy bollocks.
Not so good with people,
are you?
The point is,
the pressure builds,
the plates slip,
the earthquake comes,
and Chicago's on the fault
line this time around.
Why Chicago?
(scoffs softly) Evil's
a moveable feast, Padre.
Lucifer and his crew
banished from Heaven.
They're always looking for a
place to set down their bag.
Hey, grab me my folder,
will you there, Doctor?
I don't respond well
to orders, Lester.
Oh, funny,
that's not the tune you
sing in the ol' boudoir.
CHERRY:
Pig.
(groans)
Conditions are ripe.
The homicide rate here
just goes up, up, up.
LESTER:
Consolidate poverty,
and you create these
cultures of violence.
It jumps from one person
to the next like a virus.
If you don't want to be a
victim, you have to be a killer.
CHERRY:
So 4,000 people get shot,
or stabbed,
or fill in the blank this year.
On the bus,
you asked about
dismemberments.
I assume you're making a
connection to the whole
Englewood
murders, right?
Yeah, there were organs...
harvested, specific organs
for a mass called...
Vocare Pulvere.
You know it?
I've seen it.
A professor of mine, Rexroth,
he, uh,
he taught a class on ritual.
Cult of angels, Vocare Pulvere.
Ceremony of ash.
Those organs...
they're only used
for one reason.
MARCUS/LESTER:
A summoning.
What do you know
about Tattersal Landscaping?
JESSICA:
Yeah?
Hi.
Uh... are you okay?
This is weird, right?
I knew this would be weird.
Oh, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no.
It's-it's fine.
It's not weird.
(phone vibrating)
Sorry.
Now it's weird.
It's a woman
in my congregation.
I talked at you
for an hour--
come on, tell me, confess.
There is a situation.
This woman, she needs my help.
Um...
the Church told me I cannot,
but I'm gonna do it anyway.
Tomas Ortega...
rule breaka.
You see?
I don't always follow them
like you say.
I take it all back.
(chuckles)
Any other lines
you're thinking of crossing?
(phone vibrating)
Good night.
(whispers):
MAN:
Restrain her!
Hold her down!
No.
(gasping breaths)
Steady.
(coughing)
All right, pull
this closer.
IV push.
Hold, hold...
Back.
All right.
Try and relax.
Try and relax, Casey.
Love.
(coughs)
Unconditional love.
It's right there
on the other side of the door.
But you keep staring
through the peephole
as if you
don't deserve it.
I have a sledgehammer
in my pocket.
I will lift it up
and bring it down...
again and again
and again.
Just...
you...
wait.
(whooshing)
(gasps)
(exhales sharply)
(sighs)
Jessica?
"Stronger."
Yeah, right.
I trust you found a
place to hang your hat?
I did indeed.
A pair of tour guides
with a trailer
let me sleep in something
called a "nook."
Bit like a womb.
It's a shame they didn't have
a shower you could use.
If I didn't know better, Sister,
I'd call that flirting.
Well, it's good you
know better, then.
(bell begins tolling)
Mother Bernadette.
Father Marcus.
(bell continues tolling)
A priest walks
into a convent.
The punch line hasn't
occurred to me yet.
These look angry.
The cost of
doing business.
We've tried to grow aloe
vera for such purposes,
but it just doesn't thrive
in a Midwestern climate.
I've noticed that the belladonna
flourishes, though.
What do you use it for?
Extreme cases.
The man I saw yesterday?
Difficult, but not hopeless.
How many days?
It's been a week now.
So...
Marcus Keane.
Father Bennett
speaks admiringly of you.
What's the phrase
he used?
"A pain in my ass."
(laughs)
Yeah, well... the feeling's
mutual, I assure you.
I guess he thought
you could help me.
Bennett suggested
that the church
might have been compromised.
He fears for His Holiness'
safety here.
He's not wrong.
There's been an escalation in
the numbers of the possessed.
To be honest, it's
been a bear keeping up.
And, uh, there's...
a young woman with
a presence more...
sophisticated than any I've seen
in some...
(scoffs)
Actually, I'm a bit
out of practice.
How long?
A year and a half, the last one.
A boy.
I lost him.
I don't lose.
Ever?
Ever.
Well, then,
Welcome to the
Mere Mortals Club.
They took my collar.
Is it the collar and the
wimple that supply our power?
Partly, yeah.
The gift doesn't
reside in you or me.
The gift is God's alone.
These are excuses.
You might do well to
keep your ego out of it.
What am I supposed to do, then?
Use your Litany of Loreto,
the Invocation
of the Virgin Mary?
I suppose you could call ours
a more feminine approach.
Didn't quite work for you,
though, did it?
Well, we're not
quite done, are we?
Where you coerce and compel,
we use compassion,
forgiveness,
and patience.
I'm sorry.
Have you seen how I do it, then?
Do you not coerce and compel?
What? A bit like
you're doing now?
You lost one.
It happens.
Get back up and try again.
What else is there?
Tonight you'll join us.
Oh, will I?
Perhaps after a year and a half,
you might be open
to a new method.
What are you doing?
Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
Emergency Admission
by Certification,
Section 3.610,
right here.
"Not later than 24 hours,
the respondent," that's Casey,
"shall be examined a second time
by a psychiatrist,"
and that didn't happen.
Mom, it did.
No.
Not the way the law states.
Look, "The psychiatrist
shall not be the person
who executed
the first certificate."
They didn't do that.
Okay. You haven't slept
in two days.
Oh, don't you dare tell me that
what I need right now is sleep,
not when your sister
is locked in a...
Angela.
She's going to die.
Do you hear me? She's gonna die
if we don't do something.
And we will do something
as soon as she
gets out of here.
Are you willing to perform
the exorcism?
Whoa!
What are you talking about?
Exorcism?
Who brought up exorcisms?
She's not getting better.
Maybe that's because
she needs specialists,
and not-- no offense--
not priests.
I'm not sure specialists
can help her, Kat.
You weren't on that train.
What happened to not
being able to help?
I cannot do anything...
officially.
(woman singing)
But unofficially?
*
(soft growling)
Holy Mary.
NUNS:
Holy Mary
Holy Mother of God.
NUNS:
Holy Virgin of Virgins.
Mother of Christ.
(roaring)
NUNS: Mother of the Church.
(snarls)
Mother of Divine Grace.
NUNS:
Mother most pure.
(growling, groaning)
(growling)
Give place, abominable creature.
Give way to your Master.
Give way to Christ.
(panting)
Son of the morning,
banished from grace,
you are forgiven.
Profane thing, ashes on the
earth, you are redeemed.
Outcast, fallen angel,
you are loved.
You are forgiven.
NUNS:
You are redeemed.
You are loved.
*
(gasps)
Shh.
*
Ungrateful little bitch.
All that potential
just wasting away.
It's practically dripping
out of you.
(groans)
(monitor alarms beeping)
Oh, Jesus Almighty.
Stop it, stop!
This is your doing.
You want it over,
say the word.
Rhymes with bess, kess,
guess, bess.
Please don't kill her, please.
Do you want to save
the sweet nurse, Casey?
All you have to do is say "yes."
Okay, okay, whatever you want.
(monitor alarms beeping)
(panting)
All I ever wanted.
Casey, I'm here.
I'm here, baby, you're okay.
I'm here, I'm right here.
I've got you.
Okay. I'm going to get you
out of here.
Okay, honey, okay, okay.
NURSE:
Devil, you're a liar.
You're a liar.
Ain't no truth in you.
ANGELA:
I want her released
immediately.
There are eight hours
left in the hold.
Oh, no, no.
You screwed up.
Another psychiatrist was
supposed to examine her.
That didn't happen.
And what did happen will
make a very good lawsuit
with your name on it, and
this hospital's name on it.
Fine, I will sign Casey's
discharge papers, Mrs. Rance.
But not because of your
threat, I want you to know,
because I've exhausted
my options here.
I don't know
what else to do.
ANGELA:
Well, finally some
reason out of you.
DOCTOR:
But in my opinion,
your daughter's condition
needs further evaluation.
ANGELA:
"Condition"?
I'm sorry, what
condition is that?
Yeah, that's
what I thought.
Okay, honey, let's go.
That's the look of a man
that needs a proper confession.
I'd offer to take it,
but what with
the defrocking and all...
I'm not sure it would count.
You're back.
Yeah, well.
It turns out I've got unfinished
business in Chicago.
Join my club.
"Join the club," I think, is how
our flag-waving friends say it.
You've been practicing?
Yeah.
I take it the demon
has manifested?
Mm-hmm, yes.
So what are you waiting for?
You.
I need you.
Will you help me?
You know what they'll do to you
if they catch on?
You'll lose everything.
I know.
You're prepared to take this...
As far as it goes.
Good.
Happens to be
the only way I know.
How do you feel?
Big as a mountain.
*
* There's a light in my life
* Shining over me
* Shining over me, yeah
* Let your blessings
from above *
* Fill me
with that precious love *
* There's a light in my life
* Shining over me
* Lord, sometimes
I sit and wonder *
* Why strange things
happen to me *
* Then again I feel
* My friends are gone, yeah
* But if I put my trust
* In Jesus
ALL:
...deliver us from evil.
Amen.
* Don't you see,
there's a light... *
That's quite
a rosary.
A gift from a friend.
Can you help me
with this?
(sighs) I've been
wondering something.
What's that?
All of this,
why is it happening now?
It's a good question.
Let's go and find out.
* Fill me
with that precious love *
* There's a light in my life
* Shining over me.
MARCUS:
Let us begin.
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH